---
draft: false
title: Why Onboarding Data is Hard (and How to Make it Easier)
description: Get insight into how customer's ingest and get value from data, and how investing in the developer experience can help.
author: Mariena Quintanilla
publishDate: 2023-05-12T00:00:00.000Z
coverSVG: ../images/blog/frustrated.png
socialImage: ../images/blog/frustrated.png
linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/continuous-improvement-helped-my-team-get-unstuck-mariena-quintanilla
categories:
  - Onboarding
tags:
  - onboarding
  - data
  - developer experience
  - DaaS
---

Several market research companies have studied the Data-as-a-Service (DaaS) industry and they all agree it’s projected to grow dramatically over the next decade.  This year it’s expected to surpass $10 billion in revenue and over $50b within the next ten years. (links: [Data As A Service (DAAS) Market Size, Share & Trends – 2032 (futuremarketinsights.com, Data as a Service Market Size, Share, Trends, and Forecast 2030 | MRFR (marketresearchfuture.com), Data as a Service Market Size & Share Analysis - Industry Research Report - Growth Trends (mordorintelligence.com))](https://www.futuremarketinsights.com/reports/data-as-a-service-daas-market).  That growth is driven by the increase in data.   In 2023 you can find datasets from various sources - publicly available as well as paid, through data marketplaces (e.g. AWS Data Exchange, Snowflake Marketplace, and Databricks Marketplace), public sites (even rural counties have sections of their websites where the public can download relevant data).

!https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1569396116180-210c182bedb8?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=85&fm=jpg&crop=entropy&cs=srgb

That’s a huge opportunity for companies with data and may appear deceptively simple.  But if you want to understand the value of your data, increase its value over time and ensure your customers can quickly get value from your data you’ll run into several challenges.

*Hi! If you don’t know me, I’m Mariena and I’ve been working with customers and partners to ingest data big and small for over a decade.  I’ve worked with over 100 customers as a product manager, solutions architect, and the manager of a solutions and support engineering organization.  Perhaps most importantly I’ve also been a customer.  I’ve spent years in the weeds, working with advertising, digital identity, POI, and location data.* 

Customers that license your data more than just access to your data.  For that reason I define onboarding based on the time-to-value - the steps customers go through to use data to drive value for their business and/or their customers.

## So, why is onboarding hard?

Getting access to a new dataset is exciting but it can also be overwhelming.  The product managers, data scientists, and data engineers that interact with your data have a lot of decisions to make about how their systems interact with your data.  Changes in decisions can dramatically increase the time to ingest, process and integrate your data into their products and business operations.  Integrating your data into their systems is like walking through a dense forest with no clear trail.

!https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1612902105427-f4b0fd1b1328?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=85&fm=jpg&crop=entropy&cs=srgb

### Data Strategy

Someone will look at the initial dataset to understand what data they should ingest and how to use it in their product or business processes.  They’ll have a lot of questions to consider and need to make decisions with their product manager:

- How to match records to existing data they already have.  If there isn’t a unique identifier that can be used to enrich data, and if sources of data that would be used are generated by users, incomplete or inconsistent this can be a hard problem necessitating fuzzy string match or machine learning and potentially internal tools to allow humans to assist with matching.
- What transformations to make, including translating any of your proprietary taxonomies to their own taxonomies (or ideally, one that is universal), and how to deal with differences in precision.
- How to deal with conflicts between the data you provide and other data sources they use
- How to handle missing attributes
- Whether to strictly validate attributes in the data and discard records with bad data, or simply discard or ignore the bad attribute
- What biases, outliers, and gaps exist in the data that may need to be excluded, adjusted or accounted for in another way

### Software Design

Data Engineering teams need to determine how they will access, ingest and process the data. Often they’re looking for solutions that can best be integrated into their existing tech stack and data architecture.  Depending on the maturity of their organization and how you make your data available, they may be able to leverage existing data platform tools for orchestrating the ingestion of data or they may need to build some components from scratch.  Some of the questions they may be considering:

- Whether to ingest data as a stream (one record at a time) or in batches
- Whether to access the data through an API or through a data store (e.g. AWS s3) an SFTP server
- How to schedule or trigger the transfer of data for ingestion
- Dependencies and sequencing requirements
- What credentials to use
- How to handle restatements, incremental updates, and deletes
- How to handle delays
- What character encodings, delimiters, and formats to use for processing the data and storing it at-rest

As they begin to understand the complexity of the processing they’ll then be able to formulate a design that considers the level of modularity to build in, dependencies and sequencing requirements, and the memory and CPU needed.  In addition, they’re probably considering fault tolerance in the event of problems processing the data.  This includes monitoring, alerting, and fallback strategies.  

## What you can do to make onboarding easier

!https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1600284536251-8bb98db53468?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=85&fm=jpg&crop=entropy&cs=srgb

I’m not sure onboarding data will ever be simple - but organizations can make it easier by continuously improving the developer experience.   Every step taken can reduce the time and complexity of decision-making for teams ingesting the data creating a path by which they can clearly navigate the forest.

**(1) Know your data.** A lot of questions come in during the onboarding process, often around the nuances of the data.  It’s important the customer-facing team members have explored the data so that can answer these questions quickly, keeping customers unblocked and giving them the confidence to work with the data effectively.   Understanding the sources and methodology used to produce the data is important as well. 

**(2) Build robust documentation.**  Customers want to be able to onboard quickly.  Documentation that uncovers their blind spots and helps them develop expertise swiftly allows them to do just that.  Here are some of my favorite types of documentation for onboarding:

- *Product definition* - manage customer expectations about your data by clearly documenting the format and schema of the data, known limitations and issues, expected latency, and delivery cadence of updates.
- *Code snippets* - show examples of how to work with your data in different languages.  This can be especially helpful as a way to expose nuances of ingesting the data in different versions of frameworks like Spark or working with complex data types as well as reduce customer time spent on common tasks like copying and loading data.
- *Data visualization notebooks and templates* - go a step further and provide notebooks or other tools that enable customers to understand the shape of the data.  Allow them to export or copy the notebooks to play with the data themselves.
- *Implementation guides* - provide examples of designs for ingesting data for your most common customer use cases.  Think of these as the “getting started” guide that provides a basic implementation.  Customers can adjust based on their business but it will provide them a framework to start from so they can get to nuanced decisions more quickly.
- *Frequently asked questions* - Don’t let all the questions you answer on Slack, email, and in calls dissipate into the ether.  Putting FAQs into your developer documentation helps future customers find answers on their own.

**(3)** **Create a delivery platform** - Invest in a delivery platform so that data is delivered consistently to your customers.  When data is delivered consistently it creates predictable outcomes against which customers can build their ingestion systems.  This enables the Customer Success and Delivery teams to speak with authority and is a prerequisite for robust documentation.  

**(4) Make data available in the platforms where customers will use the data** - Today there are a growing number of marketplaces attached to data-as-a-service providers such as Databricks and Snowflake.  If you’re providing data for CMS use cases provide connectors into CMS platforms; the same goes for CRM, Marketing and Analytics use cases.  Providing integrations with partners can allow your customers to focus on using your data rather than accessing and ingesting it.

**(5)** **Staff your customer-facing teams** - There are roughly three roles vital to helping customers onboard in a timely manner (titles and specifics will vary based on organizational scale and product maturity): a Customer Success Manager, a Solutions Architect, and a Product Operations Manager.  

- The *Customer Success Manager* should build out an onboarding plan and work with the customer’s Product and Project Management teams to make sure work is scheduled and any blockers are removed promptly.
- The *Solutions Architect* works closely with customer product and engineering counterparts to provide customized implementation recommendations based on the maturity of the customer’s data engineering systems, their technical and product constraints, and needs.
- The *Product Operations Manager* configures access to data for new customers using the delivery platform and partner platforms.  In the absence of interfaces for configuring data access organizations may instead hire *Solutions Engineers* to focus on building customer solutions, rather than leveraging product engineering resources.

Organizations trying to sell data at a lower price point to smaller organizations may want to minimize staff for these lower-tier accounts.  Getting to a self-serve onboarding may be possible if the first four items are implemented.  I still recommend a CSM and SA to support large accounts as this will improve outcomes and time spent on onboarding.

Lastly, although it doesn’t make it easier, it’s helpful to assess the organizational maturity of your customers and adjust your expectations and how you service them accordingly.  Customers with less mature data engineering systems and more junior team members will benefit from your wisdom. 

## Final Thoughts

Customer Success teams alone cannot improve the onboarding experience for customers.  Nor can organizations make their data easy to work with simply by publishing technical specifications.  Organizations that invest in customer (developer) experience, staff and train their teams fully will find that they in addition to reductions in time-to-value their relationships with customers are stronger - leading to more and better product feedback, opportunities to increase revenue, and referrals.
